Have you been here 30 years?
This particular facility is 24 years old, I guess, right?
Something like that.
How long has the university been actively collecting special collections?
The material that we see in this library.
Okay, everything here can't be before 1890 because on February 14, 1890,
The library was then located in University College.
University College burned to the ground on February 14, 1890.
So everything since then, a few things were rescued and a few things were out on low.
Any really important things destroyed?
Well, our Audubon, for starters.
Do you have all five volumes of it?
We don't have it at all.
Did you have it?
Oh, yeah.
It was complete, yeah.
Sure.
So there's still one in Toronto.
The Metro has one, although they're threatening to sell it now.
They find that money's so seductive, don't they?
That's right.
especially public libraries.
That map they were going to sell up at Durham?
Oh, the map of Hereford.
Hereford, I'm sorry.
The map of Mundy.
I can tell you a long, scabrous story about that.
What happened finally?
Did they sell it?
Oh, no, they saved it.
They did save it.
Back in Hereford.
Good, yeah.
But the... I just found that on the internet the other night, just going through, believe it or not.
What happened here is that they start a campaign to replace the library.
So there's one little irony that I think you could say by, that was 1890, by 1900, within 10 years, and maybe even sooner, the collection actually was stronger than it had been before.
How did that happen?
That happened because of the response in particularly Britain and Germany, to some extent locally, and to some extent the United States, but there was a lot of stuff sent.
And places sent what they considered their duplicates.
So the Birmingham Public Library sent us Piranesi's Opera Barry in original boards.
This is 1890.
Probably about 1892 or so.
Just a hundred years or so.
And we were given extraordinary things.
But there was no Special Collections then.
There was an art cupboard.
The Special Collections Department was— The whole concept came in later than that, right?
Oh, sure.
In 1955 is when the Special Collections Department was founded, and they hired someone to run it.
Her name was Marian Brown, and I succeeded her.
So most of the stuff has really come in under your stewardship, I would say.
A lot of it has, yeah.
Have you had a focus, or is it just something that's defined by you?
We build on strength, but branch off into it.
In the great days of the 60s and early 70s, we would buy collections.
We'd buy, say, a Hobbes collection or a Darwin collection, then use that as a basis and build on it.
And you can't do that anymore?
Well, we don't very often buy collections.
We're sometimes given them.
quite often given them.
Is it because the money isn't available?
Well, I'll give you an example.
Now, I think this might even be part of that law.
In 1972, we bought eight books from J. Satan, and those eight books included 1478 Aristotle, the Hooke's Micrographia, 1645 or whatever it is,
The second edition of Boyle, Skeptical Chemist, books like that, eight of them.
The bill was $10,650, American, U.S., but in 1972, the Canadian dollar was worth more than the U.S.
dollar.
I remember American dealers were very happy to have Canadian checks.
And then larger.
I reckon now, I did a little calculation for this paper that I gave in Australia at ANU last November, that you could find all those books now.
You'd have to spend a week or two finding them, but you could find them.
They would now cost between 40 and 50 times what they cost there.
Eight books?
Eight books.
That just happens to be this one block that I
That was 1972.
1972.
Too bad you can't convert that into stocks.
That's right.
So you can see the stuff that was in the stocks, and it's been transferred, the stuff that's falling apart.
Have you ever gone out into general collections to identify things that more properly belong in special collections?
I used to do that all the time.
I used to go into both science and medicine and robots.
I still do it in robots a bit, but I just don't have time to do it very much.
You said building on strength.
Is that basically your general philosophy of collecting?
But if we get the opportunity... And the strengths being what, to recap them?
Well, there's lots of different strengths, but in a general sense, well, English literature post-restoration, although we do have a big Shakespeare collection, history of science, history of medicine, Canadiana, French 18th century...
uh material particularly the fetal soft we have special collections of voltaire and the soap but there's lots of others i mean we have the university for instance uh we had a chance several years ago to acquire a collection of australiana and there is no south pacific studies institute or anything here at the
You're anticipating a question, whether you feel you have to support the career.
Well, we do.
But you don't have to.
You don't feel that your hands are tied by what's being taught in any particular semester.
Not at all.
The Australian stuff does get used to a certain extent, but more importantly, it will get used when they set up.
something in South Pacific Studies.
Well, that's very important.
I think it is.
But you have people who say, well, they generally can't get stuff for special collections unless it supports the curriculum.
You don't feel that you have that kind of a restriction, right?
Is that your own philosophy or the philosophy of the university?
Well, they accept that.
I mean, I don't go and ask them.
If I went to the province and said, okay, in terms of building collections, are you absolutely comfortable with letting me define what gets acquired?
he would probably say, no, I'm not.
So don't invite them.
You don't ask.
You don't ask questions where you already know what the answers can be.
And, you know, don't fix it, right?
Can you think of any instances, other than that one you just mentioned, where you actually have acquired things with the expectation that it will be useful down the road.
Can you think of anything else?
Sure.
The newbie collections.
N-E-W-E-Y.
No reason you should ever have heard him of Tawley, but a 19th century, mid-19th century publisher.
His first name?
Thomas Cautley.
Okay.
Cautley, spelled C-A-U-T-L-E-Y.
He was the name known to people only because he published the first edition of The McDermott's of Ballyclaren, which is Tawley's first novel and a legendary rarity.
And he published the first edition of Wuthering Heights, also a legendary rarity, although you can see both of them at Princeton in original clock.
I got interested in him because he's dismissed normally in a line or two in 19th century publishing history as kind of a vanity publisher and little more than a cook.
Except he stayed in business for 40 years.
He published an immense variety of stuff.
So I decided it'd be interesting to put together an imprint collection for this guy.
So I did.
And the rationale being what?
Well, you could do research on 19th century publishing history from this collection.
There are no records of newbies anywhere that I know of.
You've got to extrapolate from the stuff.
So this is an archive waiting for a scholar, right?
That's right.
Well, I've done some work on it.
But that's okay to have things.
That's what attracts scholars, isn't it?
Here's the modern lit.
Well, this again, this is B10.
That's the Ptolemy, Geographia, 1561.
I think this is the one with the map of North America.
I think this is the first Buscelli map of North America that's in this book.
Pretty nice.
Yeah.
We make these boxes.
You still have funniest place?
No.
So what happened?
These are backfiled catalogs, and we used to do these pretty minimal things, but recently we've... There's Marie's catalog.
Thank you.
Well, that's wonderful.
You're talking about a bias that Americans allegedly have against them.
Well, I had a hard time convincing Marie's father, who just recently died, who's a doctor in Philadelphia, that Toronto is in the same time zone.
I mean, it's off the edge of the earth.
They're horrified when she's moving to Canada.
There are Americans in New York who think that, you know, across the Hudson River, you know, the famous New Yorker cover.
Indeed, sure.
But typically Americans either know absolutely nothing about Canada or they think it's just not part of the United States.
Or they think it's part of it.
Sure.
Well, this is a more prevalent view in the West.
You see, B.C.
is actually more separatist than Quebec.
In a real way, sure.
There's lots of talk out there about joining up with Washington, Oregon, and California.
Now, you realize, of course, that Washington and Oregon really belong to Canada.
54-40 are fight.
And so does Alaska.
It's just the stupid fucking Brits that sold it.
imagine seven million seven million dollars an election sold to alaska like they had the right to do that yeah well so uh uh you know people recognize that quebec's different you know because all those trends there but uh the rest of the country seems uh to most americans i think just to be a you know another kind of uh part probably a little bit like
Hawaii or... Well, but I mean, if you do consider Canadians as almost like... There isn't any difference, you know?
But Canadians are different.
Quite different, I think.
One of the differences is that Canadians spend half their time sitting around trying to define themselves.
Americans don't.
They already know.
They've been told.
Ever since they were knee-high, they've been told.
what it means to be an American.
Canadians get told if you search your soul deeply enough, you will discover what it means to be Canadian.
You don't really have, you know, on the other hand, you don't have, I mean, we have so many different people from everywhere in the United States, but you don't have, I mean, you do have your French and you have your
Well, we have them from everywhere.
But, I mean, do you have the same multicultural... Oh, yeah.
Oh, much more... ...correctness concerns up here that we... Well, sure.
Maybe not quite as extreme, but pretty close.
But there is a real, I think, you know, this cliché, sociological cliché, about the difference between the melting pot and the mosaic.
And the U.S.
is the melting pot.
The minute you come, when they change your name at Ellis Island, you're American, and you become American very fast.
Maybe not quite so much now, but certainly that was true.
Whereas in Canada, the mosaic was that you retained the cultural...
baggage that you've carried over.
Well, sure, sure.
In 1759, if the Brits had said, okay, bugger the French, you're not Catholic anymore, get rid of those priests, you're going to speak English, we conquered you.
They gave them the Quebec Act ever since.
Now, you see, Canada's version of a civil war is that you sit down at a table and argue for 200 years.
It's terminally boring, but at least nobody gets killed.
So we have a constitution.
Yeah, but nobody shot anyone.
I mean, compare it to Bosnia.
We, in our polite, self-effacing way, sit down and talk, blather on interminably about constitutional rights, about sovereignty, about bilingualism, biculturalism, multiculturalism,
uh you know how this affects the school system and blah blah blah blah blah but you know where i grew up uh on christmas day when the king came on the radio you stood at attention
Go back to that Japanese thing you were talking about, and that started through a digital discussion.
Could you just kind of go over to me what we were talking about out there?
Well, the Japanese apparently have a system whereby individual faculty members are able to order books from their institutions.
Through the library.
We're talking about Japanese institutions.
Name a couple, for example.
Well, the University of Tokyo, which is the elite.
In Japan, there's 600 universities, and there's both public and private.
And unlike the United States, the prestigious ones, the most prestigious ones, are the public ones.
And Tokyo University is, you know, miles above everything else.
No kidding.
It's just an inversion of everything else.
To get into, if you can get into Tokyo, the University of Tokyo, or there are a couple of other examples, then you're guaranteed, or at least, now Japan's changing, but...
This certainly was true.
You were guaranteed middle management leading to upper management, cradle to grave, that whole Japanese system.
The competition to get in is why the teenage suicide rate in Japan is higher than anywhere in the world.
It's so hard to get in.
Contrast that with Meisei University.
which is owned by Mr. Kodama.
Who's quite a collector in his own way.
He's got nine first folios.
He has the second largest collection of first folios in the world.
And his collection of Lincoln is supposed to be outstanding.
I've seen it, yeah.
He's got everything from cigar store Indians to, you know, the draft of the Gettysburg Address.
I can afford a trip to Japan.
It's fascinating.
Fascinating.
But he's got great works in the history of science.
I was actually taken out there to, may say... And he owns this university, right?
He's the president and owner.
His brother also collects... Does he collect to support his institution?
Yeah, he collects to make his institution prestigious so that it can compete with Tokyo.
I mean, ultimately, that's... That's a hell of a story.
That's what... Sure it is.
It's a great story.
He's a story-driven, by the way.
I've noticed that, yes.
I had that impression from reading your book.
At some other point, I'll tell you what I think's wrong with your book.
I'd love to hear it, because I'm writing another one.
No, he's quite affable.
Hardly speaks English, or maybe he doesn't bother, but you get...
I mean, we were driven in Mercedes and so on, on the toll road.
He likes publicity.
I mean, this is the man who bought the first folio that belonged to Arthur Houghton and reproduced it in facsimile so he could write an introduction.
I'll show it to you.
They give you books in Japan.
I would just write him.
How would I get in touch with him?
I have the address of Mesa University because they gave me all this stuff.
And you're going to give me a guy at the British Library.
Yeah, Mike Crump.
Remind me.
But it's an amazing place.
How many students approximately?
Is it a good university?
I have no idea, because the impression they gave me was that it was right up there with Hokkaido and so on, but I don't know if that's true or not.
But he deals mainly with Mr. Nita, with Yishoto.
He's a bookseller.
What's his name?
Nita, N-I-T-T-A.
You go into his office, the first thing you see is this huge photograph of Jake Staten.
And right beside him, there's a huge photograph of Warren Howell.
Now, to see Nita, who's about this tall, and Warren together, I've seen photographs.
It's very funny.
But Nita worked for the University Microfilms by Eugene Power.
He came to the United States, and he worked, I guess, in the 50s for Eugene Powell.
He's a very interesting man.
I was invited to speak to the Grolier Club of Japan.
I said, the Grolier Club of Japan?
I've never heard of the Grolier Club of Japan.
That's the name, right?
Yeah.
Then it turned out the meeting was at a private club.
There were two of us, a guy, Ian Wilson.
who's a guy who was then at the British Library, now retired, and me, were asked to speak to an afternoon meeting in a private club, and the private club was in a hotel, to the Goyer Club of Japan.
So I said,
You know, what's the goal of your coverage?
Pano.
It's a very exclusive book collecting group.
Did they call themselves the Granger?
Mm-hmm.
Shamelessly... Well, no, they claimed that he said they had permission and everything.
And what it turned out to be was a group of Nita's customers.
So we gave our little show, and we had simultaneous translation.
I mean, these wonderfully cute little girls
We translate as you go along, kind of phrase by phrase.
And I lathered on about something and they all sat there drinking their iced coffee and nodding and so on.
And when I got back, I said to Bob Nykirk, do you know about the Groyer Club of Japan?
He said, what?
The Groyer Club of Japan?
I said, you don't need a...
decided to have a little group of his customers involved at the Warrior Club of Japan.
So let's go back to where we were about Japan.
Well, these institutions compete with each other in one of the ways.
They do, I guess, in two ways.
The prestige of their faculty, who they can get to teach at them.
the prestige of their students, what kind of entrance level requirements there are, but mainly, I think, the prestige of their collections.
What kind of stuff do they have?
And that's defined in a lot of ways by what Western stuff they have.
So they like Shakespeare, they like the Bible, Milton, but they also like Adam Smith, David Hume, John Stuart Mill,
We're talking here about, you know, Persevisions.
Yeah, that's right.
Yeah, major collections with manuscript stuff.
They love children's books.
I mean, they did, the Osborn did deals for facsimile series with the Japanese that were incredible.
And they liked doing big exhibitions and so on.
Now, of course, they care about Japanese stuff.
Why are Western books so low to Western books?
I don't know.
Why is baseball so important?
Indeed.
Why are steaks and whiskey getting important?
We were fed at lunch Kobe beef.
That's what I've had.
I was over there in my aircraft carrier.
And we were sure all of scotch you could drink.
I mean, you can buy scotch from vending machines, battles of it.
See, the great thing about Tokyo is safest city in the world.
You can walk around four in the morning.
Every public telephone works.
I never saw a... Imagine if you put whiskey in a vending machine on Fifth Avenue.
I never saw anything.
Women can wander around alone because physical violence, personal physical violence, is the most shameful thing you can do.
So they have gangs, and they have labor assassinations, and that kind of stuff's okay.
They have guest attacks.
Yeah, but see, that's an organized kind of... And it is an aberration, too.
That's right.
But personal violence.
I saw the statistics.
The number of people killed by handgun in Tokyo is...
like three a year, and probably by foreigners.
But people, you know, you'd see these guys peddling around on a bicycle with a thing on the back, and I said one time to somebody who I was with, you know, what are they doing?
He said, they're delivering money.
You phone up the bank, and the Japanese like cash, and you order up three million yen or whatever, and
and a little guy on a bicycle puts it into his carrier and pedals it off to him.
It's extraordinary.
So it comes to the collections, which are the measure of excellence therapy, right?
One of them, certainly, and an important one.
That's one of the questions I asked Carol, because it came from you.
I said, is it true that if you are to achieve greatness, you have to have a great collection?
Is that one of the criteria?
I had never thought of it in quite those terms.
I guess you really do have to acquire the chips.
You have to stack the chips up.
It's a very measurable index, isn't it?
Sure.
I hadn't thought of this before.
And that's why all these institutions pay so much attention to it.
They wouldn't do those kind of statistics and publish the stuff if it wasn't.
considered really significant.
And like Harvard giving you the running number every year, they give you the number of... It's what you're meant to strive for.
And of course they do pad the figures.
Of course they pad the figures, and Harvard also pays less on account of that.
You know, the collection being there is supposed to be worth X thousand dollars a year.
They don't have to actually give you in money.
So it is said.
I understand that.
Do that again.
If you're given an appointment, now this wouldn't be true for the senior ranks, but if you're getting your first appointment as an assistant professor at Harvard, you're going to get paid less because of the rationale being that they are providing research resources that will allow you to make yourself
a great associate and thus a great pull and demand all over the world and plus the cachet being a hybrid but in in japan the uh the thing that's difficult to understand is why everyone has to have an adam smith collection i mean it wouldn't three do or
whatever, or dentistry.
Why do they want history of dentistry?
And why do they, do you know?
I don't know.
It's essential to them.
Well, I know a couple of dealers in London who've sold, I think, three or four.
dentistry collections in Japan.
So the approbation they're looking for, is it from people outside of Japan, or is this how we're measuring greatness inside of Japan?
I think mainly inside.
But you're measuring it by what you have of Western things.
Well, I think to be fair, Japanese things too.
If you like Japanese woodblock prints, which I do, in fact I don't have very many, and I stay out of those
stores because it's so seductive and they're so expensive but they're a hell of a lot more expensive in Tokyo than they are here I mean if you're going to buy them you should buy them in New York or Toronto and there is a dealer in them here but I actually went around and saw the printing being done you know they still do
pastiches of them.
And you were saying some things out as we were walking about scanning things.
Oh, yeah.
Apparently, individual faculty members can order books if they want.
In Japan?
Mm-hmm.
It goes, I believe, the route is from faculty member to the library to Marazin to Marazin.
That's a company.
A Japanese company?
A Japanese company.
No, M-A-R-U-Z-E-N.
Incidentally, did you realize that the United States is the only country in the world that pronounces Z-Z?
Why is that?
Anyway, Marathon is with you, Shoto.
They're the two biggest distributors of books.
You know, everything in Japan is a monopoly.
There's three car companies, two television companies.
Exactly.
Same with book distribution.
So these guys don't just do books, they do CDs and newspapers.
Tokyo has 27 daily newspapers.
Maybe no matter what.
a very literate country.
So it comes to Maricent and then the deal was through a company in Toronto that used to be and still is to a certain extent a supplier of database stuff to U of T. In fact, it was
which was the University of Toronto Library Automation System, which was sold off and has been sold again and so on.
So they basically come through Canada and not the US?
Yeah, and the order comes in here.
And by the US?
No.
And this is a deal, yeah, no, it's a deal between U of T and this company.
So basically, U of T basically, we'll take, we'll supply it.
U of T library, you go off the stacks, get the book, digitize it, make a disc, print it out, bind it, and ship it back.
And it keeps the disc.
Well, you keep the master disc.
We keep it here.
Sure, you supply it with them with the copy.
I am told, but you can't quote me on this, that that's what actually finances the digital operations here.
They were quite close.
So give me a name, and this won't be this trip, but let's say I come up, I was close enough.
It's like coming here is like coming to Washington.
I didn't realize how easy it is to come here.
The person who actually does it's name is Karen
K-A-R-E-N, Turco, T-U-R-K-O.
She's the head of preservation.
But they've done a lot of stuff with Cornell.
Or at least now, I'm not sure they did stuff with Cornell, but there was some kind of attachment.
Well, I'm sure.
Because Cornell, look at where they are.
And you've got Eastman Kodak, and you've got Xerox.
And the light switched on over my head.
They're giving them all this equipment.
This is where they're testing.
This is where they're test driving all this shit.
And that's where they're getting their money.
And it makes perfect sense that this would be the place to do it.
And they get the machines, and they trial out.
They work, they don't work, and whatever.
So go ahead, this is so Karen Turco.
Now, to get any more of this and to get the official line, you could tell her that I suggested you talk to me.
Well, this is something I'm interested in.
There's nothing to be ashamed of.
I don't know if she's around right now or not.
I think I'd want to prepare myself a little better for her.
It's an interesting, the really interesting question, it seems to me, is whether, in fact, this technology will replace microfilm.
Well, it will eventually.
Yeah.
When?
No.
It's going that way.
It's going fairly fast.
And, you know, they're figuring it out on a daily basis.
I bought a brand new Toshiba.